2.0 Blog Post (#2763)
tauri-apps/tauri-docs: src/content/docs/blog/tauri-2.0.mdx

We have a lot(!) of [repositories](https://github.com/orgs/tauri-apps/repositories) in our organization, which are supporting the success of Tauri and without community and working group contributions Tauri would not be where it is now. A big thank you to everyone involved!

Another special shout out and thanks for their constant involvement in the community goes to [Fabian-Lars](https://github.com/FabianLars) and [Simon](https://github.com/simonhyll). If you have been involved in Tauri's Discord or Github discussions you likely know their name or avatar.

If you ever searched on Google or YouTube for Tauri, you have probably seen one of [Jacob's streams](https://www.youtube.com/c/JacobBolda). If that's not the case please make sure to check it out and subscribe as his sessions are beyond just educational.

Another special place in our heart has the [Tauri Board](https://github.com/tauri-apps/governance-and-guidance/issues/58), highlighting [Daniel Yvetot-Thompson](https://mt.linkedin.com/in/daniel-thompson-yvetot-a98301222) for the numerous hours, sweat, blood and dedication to make Tauri known and sustainable.

> One important thing we should not forget, is that we aquired support from a stable partner of this open source project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One important thing we should not forget, is that we acquired support from a stable partner of this open source project.
```

![CrabNebula Logo](@assets/blog/crabnebula.svg)

[CrabNebula](https://crabnebula.dev/) granted multiple people mentioned above and others that are not mentioned here, the privilege to work on the Tauri ecosystem not only in their private time, but also during work time. You can find the [partnership announcement](<(https://v2.tauri.app/blog/partnership-crabnebula/)>) on our blog and we have been more than happy about this collaboration over the last year.

In 2024 alone they spent over **2,870** work hours on this project, which massively pushed the progress and allows us to announce the stable 2.0 release today.

> If you were not aware of CrabNebula yet, make sure to check out their [products and services](https://crabnebula.dev/) and consider the symbiotic relationship with Tauri if you are interested into not only improving your workflows but also supporting the Tauri ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you were not aware of CrabNebula yet, make sure to check out their [products and services](https://crabnebula.dev/) and consider the symbiotic relationship with Tauri if you are interested in not only improving your workflows, but also supporting the Tauri ecosystem.
```

## What Makes 2.0 Great?

> With this major release we improved and changed several aspects of how and where you can build, develop and publish your Tauri app. In the following sections we have more detailed insight. This does not cover everything but should give you a decent impression on what you can expect from Tauri.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this major release we improved and changed several aspects of how and where you can build, develop and publish your Tauri app. In the following sections we have more detailed insight. This does not cover everything, but should give you a decent impression on what you can expect from Tauri.
```

### Getting Started Experience

> One thing your are always going to be go trough when starting with a new framework or tool is the initial onboarding or getting started process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One thing you are always going to go through when starting with a new framework or tool is the initial onboarding or getting started process.
```

We value developer experience (DX) and try to make this initial process as seamless as building and distributing your final application.

For this we created another project, which is called [`create-tauri-app`](https://github.com/tauri-apps/create-tauri-app) or in short CTA.

> This tool allows developers to start from scratch to a running Tauri app in a few minutes instead of hours.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tool allows developers to start from scratch and get to a running Tauri app in a few minutes instead of hours.
```

You no longer need to understand all of Tauri to improve or implement specific features. The plugins usually do not depend on other plugins, with some exceptions. This means to implement a new file system access functionality it is only required to contribute to the `fs` plugin instead of Tauri itself.

As this release also targets mobile platforms, the plugin system also supports mobile plugins. You can write or re-use native code in Swift on iOS and Kotlin on Android and directly expose functions to the Tauri frontend using [`Annotations`](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/annotations.html) (`@Command` on Android), implementing a [`Subclass`](https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/documentation/the-swift-programming-language/inheritance#Subclassing) (`YourPluginClass: Plugin`) on iOS, or by invoking the Swift or Kotlin code from a Rust based Tauri command. Check out the [documentation](https://v2.tauri.app/develop/plugins/) on how to write your own plugin.

As we are releasing Tauri as 2.0, the official plugins will follow the major version of Tauri to make compatibility with Tauri's major version visible at a glance. Not all plugins are as stable as Tauri itself though.

> Each plugins stableness is defined per plugin and documented (soon) in the plugin documentation. The plugin API can possibly break in minor versions, but we will try to keep these changes to a minimum, especiallty for plugins considered stable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each plugin's stableness is defined per plugin and documented (soon) in the plugin documentation. The plugin API can possibly break in minor versions, but we will try to keep these changes to a minimum, especially for plugins considered stable.
```

We have investigated and experimented with different solutions to support mobile and decided on using the operating system native language (Swift and Kotlin) to build an interface for the Rust code and to allow developers to write part of their functionality in these languages.

This means you can re-use existing logic of your Swift or Kotlin app that interacts with the system and expose it to Rust or the frontend. Right now this works as mentioned above via the plugin system.

We support development with an emulator or a real device and provide a lot of tooling to make the process as seamless as possible. We are not completely happy about the developer experience at the moment but are actively improving to bring it up to par with the desktop experience.

On mobile not all of the official plugins are supported. Some are by design not a good fit for mobile and some are just not implemented to support mobile yet. If you would like to contribute on this part check the [last section](#call-to-action) of this post.

### The Allowlist is Dead, Long Live the Allowlist

> Yes, there is no `allowlist` anymore, as we hit the limits of this system pretty quick. We made it exclusive for Tauri core features and it did not even cover all of Tauri's APIs. Our new system not only covers all of Tauri's core API surface, it also supports app and plugin developers to implement their own access control and scoping with a unified approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yes, there is no `allowlist` anymore, as we hit the limits of this system pretty quickly. We made it exclusive for Tauri core features and it did not even cover all of Tauri's APIs. Our new system not only covers all of Tauri's core API surface, it also supports app and plugin developers to implement their own access control and scoping with a unified approach.
```

The new system we implemented is using [`permissions`](https://v2.tauri.app/security/permissions/) - _"On-off toggles for Tauri commands"_, [`scopes`](https://v2.tauri.app/security/scope/) - _"Parameter validation for Tauri commands"_ and [`capabilities`](https://v2.tauri.app/security/capabilities/) - _"Attaching permissions and scopes to Windows and WebViews"_, to create a flexible but simple to use access control system.

> It allows to create named permission or scope files and to re-use and combine them with other named permissions or scopes. This makes it possible to build more fine grained descriptive sets containing several simple or complex permissions and scopes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It allows the creation of named permission or scoping files and to re-use and combine them with other named permissions or scopes. This makes it possible to build more fine grained descriptive sets containing several simple or complex permissions and scopes.
```

> As a plugin developer you can abstract away several base permissions into a `default` permission. This can be based on your default security assumptions and threat model. All official Tauri plugin default permissions are reasonable secure by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a plugin developer you can abstract away several base permissions into a `default` permission. This can be based on your default security assumptions and threat model. All official Tauri plugin default permissions are reasonably secure by default.
```

As an app developer you can use, extend or reduce plugin permissions. Of course you can also build permissions and scopes for your own application.

With this addition, Tauri's core is now able to understand if a command invoke message from a frontend WebView is allowed to reach the command function. It is also able to attach the configured scope to the message.

The command implementation is responsible for interpreting and enforcing the scope. You can read more about our Threat Model and approach to security in our [documentation](https://v2.tauri.app/security/).

### External Security Audit

The major changes and architecture of v2 was independently audited by [Radically Open Security](https://www.radicallyopensecurity.com/) during the beta and release candidate period. Please take your time to read the [report](https://github.com/tauri-apps/tauri/blob/dev/audits/Radically_Open_Security-v2-report.pdf) and learn more about the awesome work of [@gronke](https://github.com/gronke) and [@pcwizz](https://github.com/pcwizz).

> The whole audit was funded by the great folks at [NLNet](https://nlnet.nl/) and we are super grateful to be in the privileged position to get fully funded external security audits for major releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The whole audit was funded by the great folks at [NLNet](https://nlnet.nl/) via funding from [NGI](https://ngi.eu) and we are super grateful to be in the privileged position to get fully funded external security audits for major releases.
```

The results of this audit caused us to rewrite parts of how our dev server is exposed, specifically for mobile development. Without the help and guidance of the auditors this rewrite would not have been possible :heart:.

> Additionally, we hardened our iFrame API exposure, fixed scope validation and resource identifier access for the `fs` and `http` plugin, improved our inter process communication stability and a lot of other security related fixes and improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, we hardened our iFrame API exposure, fixed scope validation and resource identifier access for the `fs` and `http` plugin, improved our inter-process communication stability, and many other security related fixes and improvements.
```

### Distribution Guides

With Tauri 2.0 the distribution diversity greatly increased. Partially, due to the mobile ecosystem and partially due to our community contributions.

We have official guides on how to ship to the [Apple Appstore](https://v2.tauri.app/distribute/app-store/), [Google Play](https://v2.tauri.app/distribute/google-play/), [Microsoft Store](https://v2.tauri.app/distribute/microsoft-store/), [CrabNebula Cloud](https://v2.tauri.app/distribute/crabnebula-cloud/), [Flathub](https://v2.tauri.app/distribute/flatpak/), [Snapcraft](https://v2.tauri.app/distribute/snapcraft/), [AUR](https://v2.tauri.app/distribute/aur/) and more distribution formats in our [distribution docs](https://v2.tauri.app/distribute/).

:::note[Github Action]
Our GitHub acion (`tauri-action`) is in progress to support automated building for the mobile operating systems but does not support it yet.
:::

## Changelog

This section contains all change going from 1.x in a concise list.

TODO: port changelog from https://hackmd.io/@amrbashir/HyzGpkSCA

## Migration

> As we try to make the migration from previous Tauri versions as smooth as possible, we have documentation available to guide you trough the process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we try to make the migration from previous Tauri versions as smooth as possible, we have documentation available to guide you through the process.
```
